
# Introduction

## Target problems addressed in this thesis

## Historical background
...TODO... Give historical background

### First instance of music generation
...TODO...
From Section 1.2 [@briot_deep_2019]

> The first music generated by computer appeared in 1957. It was a 17 seconds long
> melody named “The Silver Scale” by its author Newman Guttman and was generated by a
> software for sound synthesis named Music I, developed by Mathews at Bell Laboratories

### Mozart using mechanical aids for idea generation
...TODO...
From footnote 7 in Section 1.2 [@briot_deep_2019]

> One of the first documented case of stochastic music, long before computers, is the
> Musikalisches Wurfelspiel (Dice Music) by Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. It was designed for
> using dice to generate music by concatenating randomly selected predefined music
> segments composed in a given style (Austrian waltz in a given key).


### Ada lovelace noting computers could generate music
...TODO...
From [@hollings_ada_2018] Ada Lovelace, “Sketch of the Analytical Engine invented by
Charles Babbage, Esq., by L. F. Menabrea”, Scientific Memoirs, vol. 3, ed. Richard
Taylor, 1843, pp. 666-731 (this quote on p 694).

> “Note G” is the culmination of Lovelace’s paper, following many pages of detailed
> explanation of the operation of the Engine and the cards, and of the notation of the
> tables. The paper shows Lovelace’s obsessive attention to mathematical details - it
> also shows her imagination in thinking about the bigger picture.

> Lovelace overseed a fundamental principle of the machine, that the operations, defined
> by the cards, are separate from the data and the results. She observed that the
> machine might act upon things other than numbers, if those things satisfied
> mathematical rules.

> Supposing that the fundamental relations of pitched sounds in the science of harmony
> and of musical composition were susceptible of such expression and adaptations, the
> engine might compose elaborate and scientific pieces of music of any degree of
> complexity or extent.

Lovelace also has the Lovelace Test of Creativity attributed to her - see
[@ariza_interrogator_2009].


## Modern interest and achievements
...TODO...

* [Imogen Heap: How AI is helping to push music creativity](https://www.bbc.co.uk/news/av/technology-52236563)
* [The AI Song Contest](https://www.vprobroadcast.com/titles/ai-songcontest.html) -
In the AI ​​Song Contest teams of musicians, artists, scientists and developers take on
the challenge of creating a new Eurovision-like hit with the help of artificial
intelligence.
* [Swooshes, Seaboards, Synths and Spawn](https://www.bbc.co.uk/programmes/m000cngg)
* [David Rosen and Scott Miles on the Neuroscience of Music and Creativity](https://overcast.fm/+S_7no2kwM)
* AI Music Generation Challenge 2020 - [@sturm_ai_2020]


## What are algorithms that learn
...TODO... define/introduce machine learning

## What is composing music
...TODO...

## What does it mean to compose from scratch
...TODO... what is the minimum information we supply as a starting point? What feedback
do we give?

## Motivation for this work
...TODO...

* why are we focussing on metrics and not human evaluation
  * how do we benchmark without them?
* where is the gap - not many metrics are available
* why do we care about 'from scratch'

[@sturm_benchmarking_2017] gives background as to why we need metrics but no specific
methods.

Why do we need computational rather than human analysis

[@marsden_music_2016]

> Computational music analysis needs to carve out a place for itself where it is not
> simply mimicry of human analysis, but a place which is not so distant from the human
> activity to prevent useful communication with musicians. We need to recall the
> potential value of computational analysis, the reasons we embark on this enterprise at
> all.


Metrics - more audio features than symbolic.

[@giraud_chapter_2015]

> There is less work to date that focuses on segmentation of symbolic scores

## Scope of this work
...TODO... Symbolic music only

## List of contributions in this thesis
...TODO...

- [ ] We provide a literature review of the current state-of-the-art with respect to
algorithmic music composition: the challenges addressed and models presented
  - [ ] Note that [@briot_deep_2019] does not include `COCOnet` nor any Transformer
  models so details of these is a new contribution
- [ ] Consistent open source python re-implementations of all models compared